Testing best practices (#89)
infinum/frontend-handbook: React/Testing best practices.md

# React Testing

> Tools we used for testing are [React-Testing-Library](https://testing-library.com/docs/) and [Jest](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/getting-started)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tools we use for testing are [React-Testing-Library](https://testing-library.com/docs/) and [Jest](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/getting-started)
```

## Setup

> First of all install jest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First of all, install Jest:
```

```bash
npm install --save-dev jest @types/jest
```

> Add test script to `package.json`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a test script to `package.json`:
```

```js
  "scripts": {
    "test": "jest",
    ...
  }
```

> Create `jest.config.js` in root of project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create the `jest.config.js` file in project root:
```

```js
module.exports = {
  testPathIgnorePatterns: ["<rootDir>/.next/", "<rootDir>/node_modules/"],
  moduleDirectories: ["node_modules", "src"],
};
```

> Add `preset` to `.babelrc`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the `preset` property to `.babelrc`:
```

```js
{
  "presets": [
    [
      "next/babel"
    ]
  ]
}
```

> Next install react-test-library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, install `react-test-library`:

```bash
npm i --save-dev @testing-library/react
```

### User events

> For mocking events [testing-library/user-event](https://github.com/testing-library/user-event) is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use [testing-library/user-event](https://github.com/testing-library/user-event) for mocking events:
```

```bash
npm install --save-dev @testing-library/user-event
```

### Testing hooks

> For testing hooks [react-hooks-testing-library](https://github.com/testing-library/react-hooks-testing-library) is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use [react-hooks-testing-library](https://github.com/testing-library/react-hooks-testing-library) for testing hooks:
```

```bash
npm install --save-dev @testing-library/react-hooks
```

### Add svg support

```bash
npm install --save-dev jest-svg-transformer
```

> Add `transform` section to `jest.config.js`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the `transform` property to `jest.config.js`:
```

```js
module.exports = {
  ...
  transform: {
    '^.+\\.tsx?$': 'babel-jest',
    '^.+\\.svg$': 'jest-svg-transformer',
  },
}
```

## Utils

> ### Mock providers and store

Reviewer: I have one question for this section. What if some component needs some specific provider that is not needed anywhere else? Would you add it to this one file that is used for testing all components, or would you create another customRenderer that is based on this global customRenderer, while also providing mocks for those additional providers that are specific to the component that I am testing?

Author: In that case we can just wrap our component in that provider in that test.

Example:
```tsx
it("Is rendering", () => {
  const { getByText } = render(
    <SpecialProvider>
      <UserCard />
    </SpecialProvider>
  );

  expect(getByText(/username/i)).toBeDefined();
});
```

Not sure if that should be moved to a separate file because it's used only in this test. cc @isBatak

> While testing we need to mock various providers like [`<ChakraProvider>`](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/getting-started#setup-provider/). To mock all provider we can create `./__tests__/test-utils.tsx` file where we will export [custom render](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/setup/#custom-render) method with all providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While testing, we need to mock various providers like [`<ChakraProvider>`](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/getting-started#setup-provider/). To mock all providers, we can create `./__tests__/test-utils.tsx` file where we will export [custom render](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/setup/#custom-render) method with all providers:
```

```tsx
const AllProviders = ({ children }) => (
  <ChakraProvider theme={theme}>{children}</ChakraProvider>
);
```

> Beside providers we need to mock [datx](https://datx.dev/) store

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beside providers, we need to mock the [datx](https://datx.dev/) store:
```

```tsx
export const StoreMockContext = React.createContext<AppCollection | null>(null);

const withMockStore = (PageComponent: NextPage) => {
  const WithMockStore: FC = (props) => {
    const store: AppCollection = new AppCollection();

    return (
      <StoreMockContext.Provider value={store}>
        <PageComponent {...props} />
      </StoreMockContext.Provider>
    );
  };

  return WithMockStore;
};
```

> Now while testing we can wrap a component in `<StoreMockContext.Consumer>` to get access to the store. Store is needed when we need to mock datx model with relationships.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, while testing we can wrap the component in `<StoreMockContext.Consumer>` to get access to the store. The store is needed form mocking the datx model with relationships.
```

> After mocking all providers and store all needs to be exported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After mocking all providers and the store, we export everything:
```

```tsx
const customRender = (ui: React.ReactElement, options?: any) =>
  render(ui, { wrapper: withMockStore(AllProviders), ...options });

// re-export everything
export * from "@testing-library/react";

// override render method
export { customRender as render };
```

> Now when testing components we won't import `render` from `@testing-library/react` but instead from `__tests__/test-utils.tsx` like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, when testing components we won't import `render` from `__tests__/test-utils.tsx` instead of  `@testing-library/react`, like this:
```

```tsx
import { render } from "__tests__/test-utils";
```

Or if we add `path` to `tsconfig`:

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    ...
    "paths": {
      ...
      "@test-utils": ["__tests__/test-utils.tsx"]
    }
  },
}
```

Then we can import render like this:

```tsx
import { render } from "@test-utils";
```

### Folder structure

> All tests should be defined in the same directory where the file being tested is. There is one exception and that is `pages` folder because Next.js doesn't allow tests in `pages` folder. Thats why we have `__tests__` folder in the root of our application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All tests should be defined in the same directory where the file being tested is. There is one exception, and that is the `pages` folder because Next.js doesn't allow tests in the `pages` folder. That's why we have the `__tests__` folder in the root of our application.
```

Example:

```
src
.
├── __mocks__
│   └── react-i18next.tsx
├── __tests__
│   ├── pages
│   │   └── user.test.ts
│   └── test-utils.tsx
├── pages
│   └── user.ts
├── fetchers
│   └── users
│      ├── users.ts
│      └── users.test.ts
└── components
    └── ui
        ├── atoms
        │   └── button
        │       ├── Button.test.tsx
        │       └── Button.tsx
        └── molecules
            └── user-card
                ├── UserCard.test.tsx
                └── UserCard.tsx
```

### `__mocks__`

> Manual mocks are used to stub out functionality with mock data. For example, instead of accessing a resource from `node_modules` you might want to create a mock module that allows you to use fake data. Manual mocks are defined by writing a module in a `__mocks__/` subdirectory immediately adjacent to the module. ([docs](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/manual-mocks))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Manual mocks are used to stub out functionality with mock data. For example, instead of accessing a resource from `node_modules` you might want to create a mock module that allows you to use fake data. Manual mocks are defined by writing a module in the `__mocks__/` subdirectory immediately adjacent to the module. ([docs](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/manual-mocks))
```

> For example if we want to mock [react-i18next](https://react.i18next.com/), we will create `./__mocks__/react-i18next.tsx`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if we want to mock [react-i18next](https://react.i18next.com/), we will create `./__mocks__/react-i18next.tsx`
```

```tsx
import {
  I18nextProvider,
  initReactI18next,
  setDefaults,
  getDefaults,
  setI18n,
  getI18n,
} from "react-i18next";

const useMock = [(k) => k, {}];
useMock.t = (k) => k;
useMock.i18n = {
  language: "en-GB",
};

module.exports = {
  // this mock makes sure any components using the translate HoC receive the t function as a prop
  withTranslation: () => (Component) => (props) => (
    <Component t={(k) => k} {...props} />
  ),
  useTranslation: jest.fn(() => useMock),

  // mock if needed
  I18nextProvider,
  initReactI18next,
  setDefaults,
  getDefaults,
  setI18n,
  getI18n,
};
```

## Basic component test

> Based on [the Guiding Principles](https://testing-library.com/docs/guiding-principles/), your test should resemble how users interact with your code (component, page, etc.) as much as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on [the Guiding Principles](https://testing-library.com/docs/guiding-principles/), your tests should resemble how users interact with your code (component, page, etc.) as much as possible.
```

> Based on [the Guiding Principles](https://testing-library.com/docs/guiding-principles/), your test should resemble how users interact with your code (component, page, etc.) as much as possible.

Reviewer: Maybe expand a bit upon what `user` means in this context:
```In this context, the user is not the end application user, but some parent component that would use the component that is being tested```

> Priority ([more info](https://testing-library.com/docs/guide-which-query/)):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Query priorities ([more info](https://testing-library.com/docs/guide-which-query/)):
```

- `getByAltText` - if your element is one which supports `alt` text (`img`, `area`, and `input`), then you can use this to find that element
- `getByTitle` - the title attribute is not consistently read by screenreaders, and is not visible by default for sighted users

3. Test IDs

- `getByTestId` - The user cannot see (or hear) these, so this is only recommended for cases where you can't match by role or text or it doesn't make sense (e.g. the text is dynamic).

### Atom test example

Component:

```tsx
const Button: FC<ButtonProps> = ({ children, ...rest }) => (
  <button {...rest}>{children}</button>
);
```

Test:

```tsx
describe("Button", () => {
  it("Is rendering", () => {
    const buttonText = "click here";

    const { getByText } = render(<Button>{buttonText}</Button>);

    expect(getByText(buttonText)).toBeDefined();
  });

  it("Is onClick called", () => {
    const buttonText = "click here";
    const testOnClick = jest.fn();

    const { getByText } = render(
      <Button onClick={testOnClick}>{buttonText}</Button>
    );

    userEvent.click(getByText(buttonText));

    expect(testOnClick).toBeCalledTimes(1);
  });
});
```

> ### Molecules test example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Molecule test example
```

Component:

```tsx
const UserCard: FC<UserCardProps> = ({ label }) => (
  <Card>
    <h3>{label}</h3>
    <Button>click</Button>
  </Card>
);
```

Test:

```jsx
jest.mock("components/button");
(Button as jest.Mock).mockReturnValue(<button />);

describe("UserCard", () => {
  it("Is rendering", () => {
    const username = "Test User";

    const { getByText } = render(<UserCard label={username} />);

    expect(getByText(username)).toBeDefined();
  });
});
```

### Organism test example

Component:

```tsx
const UserCardSection: FC<UserCardSectionProps> = ({ title }) => (
  <Section>
    <h1>{title}</h1>
    <UserCard label="Test User" />
  </Section>
);
```

Test:

```tsx
jest.mock("components/user-card");
(UserCard as jest.Mock).mockReturnValue(<div />);

describe("UserCardSection", () => {
  it("Is rendering", () => {
    const title = "Test Title";

    const { getByText } = render(<UserCardSection title={title} />);

    expect(getByText(title)).toBeDefined();
  });
});
```

> ### Templates test example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Template test example
```

Component:

```tsx
export const UserTemplate: FC<UserTemplateProps> = (props) => (
  <Grid {...props}>
    <GridItem>
      <Navbar />
    </GridItem>
    <GridItem>
      <UserCardSection title="Test title" />
    </GridItem>
  </Grid>
);
```

Test:

```tsx
jest.mock("components/user-card-section");
(UserCardSection as jest.Mock).mockReturnValue(<div />);

describe("UserTemplate", () => {
  it("Is rendering", () => {
    const { getByTestId } = render(
      <UserTemplate data-testid="user-template-testid" />
    );

    expect(getByTestId("user-template-testid")).toBeDefined();
  });
});
```

> ## Page component test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Page component testing
```

Pages tests should be located in `src/__tests__/pages` folder because Next.js is not allowing tests in `/pages` folder. Test name should be the same as the page file with `test.tsx` extension.

Page example:

```tsx
const UserPage: NextPage = () => {
  const { data, error } = useSWR<Array<User>, IResponseError>(
    USER_KEY,
    fetchUsers
  );

  if (error) {
    return <ErrorPage />;
  }

  if (!data) {
    return <LoadingPage />;
  }

  return <UserTemplate userList={data} />;
};

export default UserPage;
```

It this page example we should test all three states of the page component. To do that we should mock `<ErrorPage>`, `<LoadingPage>` and `<UserTemplate>` and check if it's rendered based on fetcher response.

Test example:

```tsx
jest.mock("components/error-page");
jest.mock("components/loading-page");
jest.mock("components/user-template");
jest.mock("fetchers/users");

(ErrorPage as jest.Mock).mockReturnValue(
  <div data-testid="error-page-testid" />
);

> (LoadingPage as jest.Mock).mockReturnValue(

Reviewer: If multiple pages depend on LoadingPage, would you extract this Jest mock to a separate file?

Also, if LoadingPage has some props, how would you test that Page component sends the correct values to LoadingPage via props?

Author: No, I think that each test should have its own mocks because they can be specific to that test and not sure if reusability has any benefit here.

Regarding the props I'm not sure, I'll do a research and add it to this example.

  <div data-testid="loading-page-testid" />
);
(UserTemplate as jest.Mock).mockReturnValue(
  <div data-testid="user-template-page-testid" />
);

describe("User Page", () => {
  it("Is error page rendered", () => {
    (fetchUsers as jest.Mock).mockResolvedValue(new Error("Error occurred!"));

    const { findByTestId } = render(<UserPage />);

    expect(findByTestId("error-page-testid")).toBeDefined();
  });

  it("Is loading page rendered", () => {
    (fetchUsers as jest.Mock).mockResolvedValue(null);

    const { findByTestId } = render(<UserPage />);

    expect(findByTestId("loading-page-testid")).toBeDefined();
  });

  it("Is loading page rendered", () => {
    (fetchUsers as jest.Mock).mockResolvedValue([{ username: "test user" }]);

    const { findByTestId } = render(<UserPage />);

    expect(findByTestId("user-template-page-testid")).toBeDefined();
  });
});
```

> Because of testing `useSWR` behavior which will re-render DOM after fetcher promise is resolved we need to use `findByTestId` method that returns a promise that will resolve when element is added to DOM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of testing `useSWR` behavior (which will re-render DOM after fetcher promise is resolved), we need to use `findByTestId` method that returns a promise that will resolve when the element is added to DOM.
```

### SWR testing

> Testing swr had few known issues. One is cache persistent across tests. To fix that we need to add this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Testing swr has a few known issues. One is cache persistency across tests. To fix that we need to add this:
```

```tsx
afterEach(async () => {
  await waitFor(() => cache.clear());
});
```

Another issue is deduping. We can fix that by adding `SWRConfig` provider to our custom render.

```tsx
const AllProviders = ({ children }) => (
  <SWRConfig value={{ dedupingInterval: 0 }}>
    <ChakraProvider theme={theme}>{children}</ChakraProvider>
  </SWRConfig>
);
```

> More can be found on [this issue](https://github.com/vercel/swr/issues/781).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More can be found in [this issue](https://github.com/vercel/swr/issues/781).
```

[Additional info](https://medium.com/frontend-digest/using-testing-libary-with-useswr-f595919de2fd).

## Fetchers

Fetcher tests should be located in `/fetchers/{{ fetcher name }}` folder next to the fetcher that is tested.

### Using datx:

> When testing fetchers that use Datx, we create mocked store Datx store and instead of making API calls with `request` we need to mock `request` and test just test functionality of the fetcher.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When testing fetchers that use Datx, we create mocked store Datx store and instead of making API calls with `request` we need to mock `request` and test the functionality of the fetcher.
```

> In example below our fetcher fetches one User model and if user doesn't have a relationship to Role model we add a default one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below our fetcher fetches one User model and if the user doesn't have a relationship to Role model we add a default one.
```

    expect(fetchResponse.role).toBeDefined();
    expect(fetchResponse.role.name).toBe(RoleTypes.User);
  });

  it("api returns success with user and role", async () => {
    const mockStore = new AppCollection();
    const mockRole = mockStore.add({ name: RoleTypes.Superadmin }, Role);
    const mockUser = mockStore.add({ role: mockRole }, User);

    mockStore.request = jest.fn().mockResolvedValue({ data: mockUser });

    const fetchResponse = await fetchUsers(mockStore, "1");

    expect(fetchResponse).toBeInstanceOf(User);
    expect(fetchResponse.role).toBeDefined();
    expect(fetchResponse.role.name).toBe(RoleTypes.Superadmin);
  });

  it("api returns error", async () => {
    const mockError = { description: "Error occurred!" };
    const mockStore = new AppCollection();
    mockStore.request = jest.fn().mockRejectedValue({ error: [mockError] });

    try {
      await fetchUsers(mockStore, "1");
    } catch (fetchError) {
      expect(fetchError.length).toBe(1);
      expect(fetchError[0]).toBe(mockError);
    }
  });
});
```

For more info about testing asynchronous code read [docs](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/asynchronous).

## Hooks

> The `react-hooks-testing-library` creates a simple test harness for React hooks that handles running them within the body of a function component, as well as providing various useful utility functions for updating the inputs and retrieving the outputs of your custom hook. This library aims to provide a testing experience as close as possible to natively using your hook from within a real component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`react-hooks-testing-library` creates a simple test harness for React hooks that handles running them within the body of a function component, as well as providing various useful utility functions for updating the inputs and retrieving the outputs of your custom hook. This library aims to provide a testing experience as close as possible to how your hook is used in a real component.
```

### Example hook:

```tsx
function useModal(initialOpen = false) {
  const [isOpen, setOpen] = useState(initialOpen);

  const toggle = useCallback(() => {
    setIsOpen(!isOpen);
  }, [isOpen]);

  const close = useCallback(() => {
    setIsOpen(false);
  }, []);

  return { isOpen, close, toggle };
}
```

### Example test:

```tsx
describe("useModal", () => {
  it("isOpen should change to true when toggle", () => {
    const { result } = renderHook(() => useModal());

    act(() => {
      result.current.toggle();
    });

    expect(result.current.isOpen).toBe(true);
  });

  it("isOpen should change to false when close", () => {
    const { result } = renderHook(() => useModal(true));

    act(() => {
      result.current.close();
    });

    expect(result.current.isOpen).toBe(false);
  });
});
```

> If any part of your test is preforming an update that action needs to be wrapped into `act()`. More info about [act()](https://reactjs.org/docs/test-utils.html#act).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If any part of your test is preforming an update, that action needs to be wrapped into `act()`. More info about [act()](https://reactjs.org/docs/test-utils.html#act).
```
